# Bootstrapping Democracy

> No man is an island,  entire of itself; every man is a piece of the continent, a part of the main; if a clod be washed away by the sea, Europe is the less, as well as if a promontory were, as well as if a manor of thy friend's or of thine own were;  any man's death diminishes me, because I am involved in mankind, and therefore never send to know for whom the bell tolls; it tolls for thee. 

> -- John Donne, Meditation XVII

No one is an island....

Democracy is the justification of state authority.....

But democracy has a problem.  When we peel back the typically emotive...

The thesis that I am going to defend is that if democratic authority is to be considered legitimate, it must first be voluntary....

This work is made up of two parts.  In the first, I am going to explores some of the problems and paradoxes that lie at the very foundations of democratic theory.  Problems which collectively form what I call the Bootstrap Paradox - the inability of democratic theory to justify itself on its own terms.

In the second, I will examine the relationship between authority, legitimacy, and democracy....

Democracy has a problem.  When we peer beyond the emotive facade of rhetorical and pragmatic appeal that democracy offers us in order to examine its theoretical underpinnings, we are confronted with a tangled web of contradiction and paradox.  If some democratic government is said to be legitimate because it was elected in the proper manner or procedure required by the constitution, then how do we justify the constitution?  How can we reconcile the demands of liberty and protections of personal rights with collective democratic action?  And how do we democratically decide who should be included amongst the people when democracy first requires a people to decide something?

These vacillating and mercurial normative foundations, like that of any building, threaten to topple a range of higher order concerns relating to political legitimacy, authority, and obligation.  And despite a revival of interest in the normative foundations of democracy from political theorists over the last 50 years, little progress has been made beyond Churchill’s pragmatic quip that democracy is the worst form of government, except for all the others we’ve tried from time to time.  Perhaps because democracy can’t be justified. 

My thesis explores some of the paradoxes that lie at the very foundations of democratic theory.  Problems which collectively form what I call the Bootstrap Paradox - the inability of democratic theory to justify itself on its own terms.  In the first half of my thesis, I examine how these foundational challenges are generated by the competing conceptions of democracy and  various accounts of democratic legitimacy.  In the second half I propose a new account of democratic legitimacy based upon a normative principle I call Reciprocal Autonomy and a jurisdictional mechanism I call Dynamic Federalism.

## Introduction

In this chapter, I introduce the project of democratic theory, the Bootstrap Paradox and how this paradox undermines the democratic project.  Democracy has a problem. Beneath accounts of democratic theory lie a number of paradoxes and problems that undermine the project of democratic legitimacy.  Problems of foundation that collectively make up what I call the Bootstrap Paradox. 

The thesis I'm going to defend is that democracy, according to extant accounts at least, democracy is not democratic.  Its establishment, alteration and operation all require justificatory recourse to non-democratic ideals, and any substantively non-democratic system cannot be justified as being democratic.

## What Democracy? 

Democracy has become a largely vacuous notion.  Today, people use the term to describe any vaguely warm feelings towards some system of government they may have.  But when a term means everything, it means nothing. The challenges in defining and encapsulating the notion of democracy lead us, according to Dahl, down a "tedious exploration of a semantic bog".  But how we conceptualise democracy shapes and constrains both accounts of democratic justification and how we can address the Bootstrap Paradox.

In this chapter, I review the various conceptions and accounts of democracy and democratic legitimacy. Political theorists have attempted to justify and criticise democracy from a variety of perspectives.

## The Problem of the People

Democracy begins with the people.  The _demos_ is the _kratos_, _praxis_, and _telos_ of the state.  Democratic theory presupposes the existence of a determinate polity of people who organise together and govern themselves.

Yet the matter of _who_ ought be included amongst the people is a matter both logically and temporally prior to that of _how_ they ought govern.  The question of who must consent, who ought be heard, or who should be entitled to vote, cannot be answered democratically without first knowing who to ask.  Democracy - the rule of, for, and by the people - simply cannot answer the fundamental issue of which people should be governed under which state.  Who ought make up the people can therefore only be answered by some pre- or non-democratic principle.

Reliance upon some extra-democratic principle to justify democratic inclusions should not however, be problematic in and of itself. Numerous normative principles rely on earlier, lower order ones to provide some form of moral foundation.  The problem for democracy only arises when its claims of legitimacy rely upon difference making.

Difference making lays at the heart of many accounts of democratic legitimacy.  According to these theories, a democratic state is legitimate precisely because it brings about different outcomes or states of affairs relative to non-democratic ones.

But who makes up the people largely predetermines the outcome of a democratic process, irrespective of the particular democratic mechanism used.  The question of inclusion strips democratic processes of their difference making power and renders them either causally powerless.  The power of difference making is thus usurped by the principle of inclusion, a principle completely exogenous to extant democratic accounts.  The decisions and outcomes of democracies become attributable to the accidents of history, thus eroding any subsequent normative claims based on difference.

## Paradoxes of Procedure

In this chapter, I explore foundational paradoxes of procedural accounts of democratic legitimacy.  According to procedural accounts of democracy, legitimacy is derived from adherence or fidelity to some process or constitution.  But how can the creation of this constitution be legitimate when its creation proceeds its existence? How can a decision mechanism be agreed upon democratically?  The democratic method would be to deliberate or vote on the method but this requires some earlier agreement on what decision method will be used to answer this question.  

I also examine challenges raised by social choice theory such as Arrow's Impossibility Theory Condorcet's Paradox of Transitivity whereby seemingly 'irrational' intransitive collective or aggregated preferences arise from 'rational' transitive ones.  Procedural accounts of democratic legitimacy cannot overcome these foundational paradoxes without evolving into substantive or utopian accounts, which undermines their ability to imbue legitimacy.


## Limits of Liberalism

In this chapter, I explore the impossibility of contesting liberalism democratically.  According to liberal theory, legitimacy requires the protection of certain individual rights and freedoms.  But how can disagreement over the limits between public and private be decided on without undermining liberalism? Determining this limit collectively makes the question of what is a private right a public issue.  But determining the limit by some other means, say judicially, requires some earlier agreement on how the limit will be decided, and simply pushes the problem back one level.

Rawls, Gaus and other liberal theorists have proposed variants of liberal theory such as public reason.  These mechanisms however, appear endorse contractions in what values or policies liberal democracies should hold, or arbitrarily endorse values depending on the order they are debated. 



## Bootstrapping Democracy

In this chapter, I explore whether democracy can solve these problems by picking itself up from its own theoretical bootstraps. Procedural accounts of democratic legitimacy cannot recover from founding paradoxes without turning into utopian or substantive accounts.  Substantive accounts seem unable to simultaneously underpin democratic legitimacy and solve the boundary problem. But what if we could develop an account where adherence to the process is also the realisation of the substantive ideal? We would then have a potential way to bootstrap our way out of these dilemmas.  We would be able to bootstrap democracy.

My starting point is the identification of what exactly democratic theory needs to justify in order to claim legitimacy.  Here, I argue that unlike accounts based on affect or coercion, democratic theory only needs to justify its political authority - the moral obligation to be obeyed _simply_ because it is commanded.

## Reciprocal Autonomy

In this chapter, I develop the normative foundations of my solution to the Bootstrap Paradox.  I identify autonomy as a self-realising foundation that can exist simply by its assertion.  I argue that recognising the autonomy of others and therefore their claim to self rule, on the proviso that they recognise ours, is the minimum requirement for political cooperation and once accepted, both underpins our own claims of self determination whilst limiting our claims over others. 

## Dynamic Federalism

In this chapter, I develop a framework for realising the basic unit of political association.  The Principle of Reciprocal Autonomy provides a necessary, but not sufficient condition for solving the Bootstrap Paradox.  I show how a dynamic system of overlapping jurisdictions allows us to realise political association without succumbing to the earlier paradoxes I explore.