Simulation as Argument

Philosophy involves a lot of story telling -- dialogues, discourses, dialectics, but most importantly, arguments.  Philosophy also involves a lot of simulation.  Plato's Allegory of the Cave is an early example of mental simulation -- of thought experiment.  Conceptual simulations like thought experiments have been a regular feature of the philosophical method for the last two millennia and more recently, philosophers have begun to use computer simulations to support claims and positions in ethics, political philosophy, and epistemology.

Computer simulation has much to offer philosophical investigation.  Many problems of interest to philosophers exist in domains that are difficult to access empirically, ethically, or legally.  Some problems are mathematically intractable and cannot be solved analytically making computational approaches essential.  And other problems involve complex phenomena characterised by emergent behaviour like social systems and group behaviour.  Computer simulation offers some new answers to these problems in a way that traditional methodologies cannot.

Yet computer simulation brings its own set of unique limitations.  Simulation is sometimes criticised as having poor validity, failing to accurately reflect the nature of the reality it is supposed to represent.  Often, the simulation is a complex blackbox of proprietary code, making replication of the results difficult.  This lack of access to the code casts doubt upon its reliability and adds further to the concerns of validity.  Simulation requires a degree of trust that may not be warranted.

In this presentation, I advance a proposal for a new computational philosophy methodology -- Simulation as Argument.  Inspired by a software development paradigm know as literate programming, I merge simulation and story telling into a single medium -- the computational paper.  This not only leverages the benefits of computer simulation whist mitigating its limitations, but it also has an additional aesthetic benefit that enhances the persuasiveness of the argument.