Moral Principles and Political Obligations
==========================================

AJ Simmons 1979

CH1
---

Obligations are limitations on our freedom, impositions on our will, which must be discharged regardless of our inclinations. The are independent of our desires to perform them. p7

Oughts do not entail obligations and vice versa.  Ought-judgements are the end products of moral deliberations of which obligations and duties may play a part. p9

Political obligations are only one sort of consideration relevant to determine how we ought act. p11

Contrasts obligations and duties: p14-15

- obligations are the result of some voluntary action
- obligations are owed to specific people
- obligations generate correlative rights
- obligations are not generated by the nature of the act but nature of the relationship.

Positional duties do not establish moral constraints. A man pressed into service is not morally obliged to obey orders. p22

The fact that an institution exists, and its rules apply to me, in no way binds me to that institution. p23

Obligations have to be more than prima facie requirements. The ought/obligation distinction renders the prima facie account redundant. p25

CH2
---

"A political obligation is a moral requirement to support and comply with the political institutions of one's country of residence" p29

The notion of political obligation is one that concerns the moral requirements that bind us to *particular* states or institutions. p31

It is common place for non-particularised accounts to simply assume a particularised application.  But why should a government being *ours* be special in any way? p32

Plato's Crito suggested 3 grounds for obligation: p35

- the state was good and thus owed obedience
- the state was a benefactor to be repaid
- tacit consent.

Why must there be a singularity requirement to obedience? Why must the state require obedience from all subjects & why must a person be bound to only one state or institution? p36

"A theory of political obligation ought tell us what class of people are bound to their governments and why" p36

Utilitarian accounts of obligation are problematic because it is difficult to see how obligations to obey could ever trump obligations to maximise the good in any instance. p47

"We can derive from the simple act-utilitarian approach no marl requirement to support or comply with the political institutions of one's country of residence." p48

Obligations don't seem to give way in cases of slight changes in net utility (from negative to positive) that utilitarianism would require. p49




Bibtex
	@book{simmons1979moral,
	  title={Moral principles and political obligations},
	  author={Simmons, A.J.},
	  year={1979},
	  publisher={Princeton University Press}
	}