---
author: Dave Kinkead
title: Bootstrapping Democracy
audience: Faculty of Arts Three Minute Thesis
date: 23 Aug 2013
---

# Bootstrapping Democracy

### Three Minute Thesis

## Introduction

Have you ever though about why should we obey some people but not others?

What's the difference between the government threatening you if you don't pay your taxes, and a gunman threatening you if you don't give him your wallet?  It might be sensible to obey both in order to avoid _bad consequences_ but only _one_ can claim a _moral obligation_ to obey.

Now what if rather than a gunman, it was Greenpeace threatening you? "Your money or your life, so we can save the whales."  This time both groups might use your money for good, but its clear that simply doing good isn't enough to justify coercive force.

Political philosophy attempt to answer the question of why some groups have _legitimate authority_, but others don't.  But there's a problem.  Because if we follow the reasoning behind any account of democratic legitimacy, we run into a murky bog of contradiction and paradox.

## Paradoxes

My thesis, Bootstrapping Democracy, examines the paradoxes that lie at the foundations of democratic theory.  Paradoxes which seep up and undermine subsequent accounts of democratic legitimacy.

Take procedural accounts for example.  According to many theorists, the thing that makes a government legitimate is that is elected in the proper manner, and that it follows the laws laid down in the constitution.

But then how can these laws be legitimately established in the first place?  Because procedure is all that matters, how can that first law, the constitution be legitimate, when no procedure exists for its establishment?

This dilemma is just one of a number of problems that make up what I call the Bootstrap Paradox - the inability of democracy to justify its self without becoming entangled in a web of self referential circularity or resorting on the crutches of non-democratic theory.

## Thesis

So far I've identified paradoxes relating the formation, inclusion, and bounding of democracies, at least one of which is present in every major account of democratic legitimacy.

My aim of my research is to develop an account of democratic legitimacy that avoids these problems by bootstrapping itself - by identifying a mechanism who's process is simultaneously the realisation of substantive democratic ideals.

My hope is that this new account will allow democracy to pick itself up by its own theoretical bootstraps and stand on firmer foundations, thus avoiding Churchill's most pessimistic observation democracy is the worst form of government.
