Does Democracy Need the Vote?
=============================

For most people, voting is synonymous with democracy. Putting a tick, a cross, marking preferences of 1 2 3, or even partially punching a chad is the very embodiment of democratic action.  I've been trying to get my head around exactly how voting is related to democracy ….

Most people would accept that voting is not sufficient for democracy.  Casting a ballot may be associated the *voice of the people* but there are plenty of cases where the mere action of voting is not enough for a process to be properly considered democratic.  Firstly, there needs to be some level of procedural fairness to the vote.  If my vote is ignored, defrauded or otherwise not properly counted, then the process is unlikely to be democratic.  The 're-election' of a despot with 96.7% of the popular vote is rightly labelled a shame.

Freedom and availability of choice in voting also seem like crucial requirements.  One party states like North Korea and pre-collapse USSR cannot be called democracies because their elections were not free and fair.  Yet even procedurally fair elections may not be democratic.  The original constitution of the Soviet Union allowed the people to freely vote for their local councils (their soviets).  Members of these local soviets would then vote for regional soviets, would would then vote for national soviets and they for the Supreme Soviet, but even 1930's USSR could not be properly called a democracy.

The problem here is that at each level, the influence of the people's vote is diminished.  The  proximity between those doing the ruling and those being ruled in a political system is clearly a constitutive factor in determining whether it can be called democratic.  This has direct implications for even supposedly democratic countries in North America and Western Europe as the original 'Soviet Democracy' was not that dissimilar to the current European Commission which is selected by the European Council who are in turn appointed by national parliaments; or the US Electoral College whose members vote for the US President.

A related issue is impact or influence of one's vote.  Here I don't mean in a counterfactual sense, as if my vote must be the deciding one, and the voting paradox that this raises.  But at the very least, my vote should count in some monotonic or even probabilistic way: my vote shouldn't diminish the chance of my preference being realised, rather, it should increase it.  

Who gets to vote becomes an important consideration.  Our intuitions of fairness and political equality require something like the all-affected principle to be part of any democratic process.  Roughly put, the all affected principle requires that anyone affected by a collective decision have some say and it cuts right to the heart of the suffrage issue.  Substantive democracies require universal suffrage for all those affected by laws so any system that disenfranchises groups of citizens, residents, or those otherwise bound by the laws of the land, cannot be considered democratic.

But again, this raises serious complications for states we typically consider even full democracies.  Australia was one of the first countries in the world to grant suffrage to women, although it wasn't until 1967 that we granted indigenous Australians the right to vote; yet even today, hundreds of thousands of permanent residents remain disenfranchised because suffrage is extended only to native or naturalised citizens.  

While all contemporary liberal democracies exclude some groups of people from the franchise, many more people are disenfranchised by a more subtle process of over inclusion because the all affected principle only tells us half the story.  By extending suffrage to those not affected by issues, the vote of those who are affected are effectively diluted by others who lack skin in the game.

It should be very clear by now that voting is not sufficient for democracy, even when the voting process is free and procedurally fair.  But is voting even necessary for a process to be democratic?  In classical democracies like ancient Greece, is was demonstrably not.  Many public positions such as magistrates in Athens were filled by a process of sortition or lottery. Random selections (from suitably qualified land owning men of course) was viewed as more democratic than voting as it ensured political equality amongst citizens and limited the scope for lobbying, voting trading, and other sources of political corruption.

While uncommon in modern politics, sortition is still used in most liberal democracies to fill juries.  What could be fairer, and a better solution for the decreasing character of representation under modern competitive elections that require massive financial resources, than giving all citizens equal chance of ruling through random selection?  If a randomly selected committee of citizens is sufficiently competent to send someone to jail for life, then why can't juries make the law in addition to interpreting it?

Voting it seems, is neither necessary nor sufficient for democracy.  But what then could explain the deep connection between the two.  The answer is to realise the nature of the value that voting brings to democracy.  It is instrumentally, rather intrinsically valuable.  Casting a vote or being granted a say in some matter can help us engage with the issue, to increase our participation and become member rather than subject of the polity.  Yet the ever increasing levels of voter apathy and disconnect from the political process we are currently witnessing urges caution with this conclusion.  Voting may offer us an opportunity to engage politically, but it is clearly not sufficient to, nor the only way to realise this.